NewFrontEnd/work/type-funs.txt

Type Functions: 

Terminology: a defined type function (type lambda abstraction) is called a "tyfun".  These
are one form of tycon, distinguished from datatype tycons and primitive tycons, which are
_irreducible_.

* "Compiling" type functions to optimize their application with respect to duplicating
"immutable" type subterms.

The problem is to reduce or minimize reproduction of existing type expression structure
when applying type functions (e.g. for generic instantiation of polytypes). The goal is to
eliminate the need for drastic measures like FLINT's hash-consing of types.

IDEA: compile the body of a type function (a type term) into "code" that builds the
  result out of the parameters and the immutable subterms of the body (the subterms not
  containing a parameter variable).

Example:

type ('a, 'b) t = 'a * (int -> string) -> 'b

Here the code would be something like

     let t1 = int -> string (* bindinig t1 to a constant term that is
                             * shared by all applications *) 
      in \(p1, p2). arrow (times (p1, t1), p2)

OR

val t = 
    let val t1 = CONTty (arrowTyc (CONty (intTyc, nil) -> CONty (stringTyc, nil)
        (* bindinig t1 to the constant, immutable term (int -> string) *) 
     in fn (p1, p2) => CONTty (arrowTyc (CONty (typleTyc (2, [p1, t1])), p2)
    end

where p1 and p2 represent the type variables 'a and 'b.

Then only the arrow and times nodes of the body of the defn are copied when applying the
type function. The immutable subterm "int -> string" is not copied and is shared by all
the contractions ("immutable" in the sense that it is a term that does not contain
(bound) occurrences of the parameter variables p1 and p2).

We do not need to do this factoring of immutable subterms for primitive atomic tycons like  
int, string, bool, etc.  
 
This idea addresses the issue of sharing (or avoiding duplication of) immutable subterms
of the body of a tyfun. But simple reduction of a tyfun may cause duplication of
parameter type terms.

Defn: a type term is normalized if all applications of type funs in the term have been
reduced by symbolic application of the type functions.
 
The normal form of a type t is unique, and the operation of normalizing a type t is
expressed as "norm t".

The fact that t normalizes to t' is expressed by the notation t >> t', so t >> norm t.


Normalization would be a bottom-up process, starting with the deepest tyfun applications.  
 
Example:

   type pair X = X * X

   pair (int -> string) >> (int -> string) * (int -> string)  [strings vs dags!]

One approach to avoiding such _duplication_ of argument types is to use some form of
the calculus of substitutions. But this is overkill because the reduced type
pair (int -> string) will be a DAG.

Type reduction and type equality.

How do type reduction and type equality interact?

The simplest aproach to testing whether type terms t1 and t2 are equal is to normalize the
two type terms, yielding t1' and t2' and then perform simple structural equality on the
normalized terms t1' and t2'.

The SML approach involves the following process

(1) tyfuns are assigned unique identifiers (stamps) when they are defined.

(2) When checking equality of tf1 args1 and tf2 args2
    (a) check whether tf1 and tf2 are the same tyfun by comparing their unique identifiers
    (b) if they are the same (implying they have the same arity), check equality of the
        (corresponding componenets of) arguments arg1 and arg2 as type tuples.
    (c) if tf1 and tf2 do not have the same unique identifier, then normalize both types
        and iterate by testing equality of norm (tf1 args1) and norm (tf2 args2).

This seems to work ok because the normalizations of tf1 args1 and tf2 args2 are usually
cheap, and duplication of argument types is not a serious problem.

A fancy approach to equality in the presence of reduction of tyfun applications might
involve some sort of interleaving of equality checking and reduction (driven top-down).

OBSERVATION: type terms, whether reduced or not, are generally _small_ data structures.
(providing, as usual, that we avoid the exponential blowup of types in type inference).	

Generally, the expectation is that reduction/normalization of type terms is inexpensive
and duplication of arguments is not a serious problem.  In particular, duplicated type
arguments will "share" as pointer structures in memory (representation of a reduced type
term will be a DAG). But the equality test cannot make use of the fact that a term is a
DAG because we don't have a pointer equality test!


How to compile Type Functions (tyfuns)

1. identify all maximal "stable" or "immutable" type terms in the body of the tyfun
   (these are subterms that do not contain occurences of parameter type variables),
2. name and let-bind those maximal stable subterms (stable environment),
3. reconstruct body type term in the context of the of the environment (2.) of maximal
   stable subterms.


The head node of a _stable subterm_ does not "dominate" a parameter type variable leaf node.
A maximal stable node of the body type term is a stable node that is not below/within another
stable term.

Terminology: "stable" == "immutable" = contains no parameter type variables

Where-When to compile tyfuns?
1. during elaboration from syntax trees to "absyn" types
2. as an absyn -> absyn" transformation


Strictness

Tyfuns may not be "strict", where by "strict" I mean every parameter type variable appears
in the body (*). For instance, consider the tyfun

    type f X = int

where the parameter variable "X" does not occur in the body of the tyfun. Or consider

    type g Y = f Y

where the body "f Y" involves an application of the non-strict tyfun f. If we "reduce" the
application, this is equivalent to

    type g Y = int

which also is non-strict. For tyfun compilation, the simplest approach is to first
"normalize" the body type term before analyzing it to determine its maximal stable
subterms.

Because tyfuns are "1st order", normalization is terminating and cheap (under the general
assumption that type terms are "reasonable").

For "shortcut type equality", we need to associate with each tyfun a "strictness
signature" (a list or vector of booleans) that tells us which parameters the tyfun is
strict in.

Defn: shortcut type equality

  When comparing two types f1 argtys1 and f2 argtys2, where f1 and f2 are tyfuns, we check
  whether f1 == f2 (have the same unique identifier) and if so, we check equality only of
  corresponding "relevant" argument types in argtys1 and argtys2.

We could enforce the (new) rule that all tycons are (fully) strict.  What is the point of
defining non-strict tyfuns or datatype tycons?  The only reasone I can think of for
defining a non-strict tyfun is to satisfy a signature specification like

    type f: ty => ty

by declaring a constant tyfun like

    type f X = int.

Is this reasonable?


