NewFrontEnd/work/compilation/separate-compilation.txt

What does "separate compilation" mean in the context of (S)ML and sML?

* Classical separate compilation

  - context of first-order imperative languages (like Pascal and C)

  The assumption is that the static "interface" sublanguage is sufficient
  to describe imports of an importing compilation unit (i.e. source file) everything
  it (the compiler) needs to know about the imports. Typically this means it describes
  the types of values and functions in the imported unit, including relevant type
  definitions.

  The effect is that the order of compilation of a set of compilation units can, in
  principle, be arbitrary, not constrained by dependencies between the units.  But in
  practice, because of imperative effects (including data structure initialization, there
  is a required order that can be specified by an external build tool like Unix make.

  In ML, the components of an imported unit are module-level entitites like structures,
  functors and signatures.

  The problem (in the presence of higher-order functors, at least) is that the necessary
  static description of an imported functor must describe how the functor acts functionally
  to map parameter static stuff into the static stuff in the resulting module.

  "Classically", functor signatures are not able to represent this functional static behavior
  of functors.

  I have used the term "full signature" to describe an internally generated static
  representation of a functor that captures its static functional behavior (as a signature
  + *realization*).  The realization part is not captured by the surface syntax (or
  abstract syntax) of functor signatures. The static functional behavior of a functor
  also is not just a matter of static-level lambda-calculus, because of generative
  declarations (e.g., datatype and structure declarations) which means that the functional
  behavior of a functor has *effects* in the form of generation of new static identities.

  [In the Caml/OCaml community, this issue has inspired the introduction of "purely applicative"
  functors, which is a rather artificial and unrealistic notion.]

  For instance,

    functor F () =
    struct
      datatype d = A
    end

  An application of F has the "static effect" of introducing a new identity for a data
  type d, and each application of F produces a distinct identity for d.  So

    structure A = F ()
    structure B = F ()
    A.d and B.d do not match -- they are different type constructors. So
    val x : A.d = B.A ==> type error

  
 So how does "separate compilation" work in the context of such static effects?

 In SML/NJ, separate compilation is based on the "full signatures" of imports produced by
 prior elaboration (static evaluation?) of imported units/modules.

 In practice, this imposes an order of compilation (or at least elaboration) that is not
 required in classical "pure" separate compilation.

 One could try to restrict the source language, imposing language design restrictions that
 would allow for the classical "pure" separate compilation.  I choose not to do so, facing
 my version of "reality" (module semantics) and the practical consequences that follow.


 
